---
title: "Essay: The Politics of Music"
last_modified_at: 2020-04-24T00:00:00-05:00
categories:
  - Essay
tags:
  - Music
  - Politics
  - Essay
---

# The Politics of Music: Pink Floyd's *Animals*

The definition of a great album varies between music listeners. Some prioritize the minute details: technical ability, musicianship, harmony, structure; while others emphasize the larger aspects: relevance, commercial success, and innovation. During the 1970s, Britain was struggling with “conflict and a class war on industry, a sharp downturn in the economy, a fight to extremism in political life, and a rise in public and domestic violence” (Morgan). This not only caused pessimism and a sense of distrust within the kingdom’s citizens, but heavily influenced Pink Floyd’s 1977 concept album, *Animals*. Largely written by the band’s keyboard player Roger Waters and lead guitarist David Gilmour, the album included only five songs: the introduction and conclusion of “Pigs on the Wing 1” and “Pigs on the Wing 2,” each a minute long; “Dogs” lasting seventeen minutes; “Pigs (Three Different Ones)” lasting twelve minutes; and “Sheep” lasting eleven minutes, extremely uncommon for a mainstream rock album at its time. Though the album strays from progressive rock conventions and its lengthy songs are seemingly undesirable for radio play, *Animals*’ form factor allowed Pink Floyd to produce “one of the most extreme, relentless, harrowing and downright iconoclastic hunks of music to have been made available this side of the sun” (Blake). Animals’ unique structure allowed Pink Floyd to provide a scathing critique of the British implementation of Capitalism while showcasing the band’s famed musicianship and songwriting ingenuity.

Contrary to many progressive rock albums that meddle their intended meaning, Animals’ central argument against capitalism is clear and well-articulated. The album’s title, and much of its inspiration can be credited to George Orwell’s *Animal Farm*; however, the book’s argument concerns Stalinism rather than capitalism. Like the novel, Pink Floyd uses three types of animals as represent three classes within British society: Dogs represent the businessmen; Pigs, the politicized aristocracy; and Sheep, the general workforce. The content-rich middle three songs on the album detail the lives of each animal; each offers a unique perspective on how the economy of Britain is working for or against the social class each represents. “Dogs” describes the cutthroat nature of the business-ruled economy in Britain, who “ruthlessly pursue the ideal of material prosperity… to the detriment of their fellow man” (Rose 94). In the first verse, Gilmour takes the perspective of one business man providing advice to another: “You have to be trusted by the people that you lie to/ So that when they turn your backs on you/ You’ll get the chance to put the knife in.” “Pigs (Three Different Ones)” uses its three verses to attack three prominent leaders of the British conservative movement: Mary Whitehouse and two other unnamed figures. Waters’ uses divisive insults: “well-heeled big wheel,” “fucked up old hag,” and “house proud town mouse,” combined with echoes of “Haha, charade you are,” to accuse the conservative movement of misleading the British public and hindering the country’s success. “Sheep,” the last song essential to the album’s argument, details an initially naive proletariat revolting against the pigs and dogs in control of society. The song references Psalm 23:1 saying, “The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want,” but shows the susceptibility of a herd-like population to exploitation by adding “He maketh me to hang on hooks in high place … For lo, He hath great power, and great hunger.” The three songs’ lengths combined with their brash lyrics allow for the album to make a political statement in an unprecedented way. *Animals*’ powerful message is poignant, blunt, and is one of the key factors that has allowed the album to remain relevant over the duration of its existence.

*Animals* also showcases Pink Floyd’s masterful songwriting ability; the album’s three middle songs each use musical ideas to support the album’s bashful lyricisms and message. The main theme of “Dogs” is based on a relatively simple four chord progression and stays in the same key throughout. These two attributes would bore listeners over the song’s seventeen-minute length; however, Pink Floyd creates a sense of tension that carries the song forward. Cohen elaborates on the band’s tactics saying, “The song is saturated with neighbor chords to the dominant A major …. Through the majority of the song, these chords do not truly resolve, instead building a harmonic tension that coincides with the melodic one” (Cohen 7). In addition to the suspenseful chord voicing, the song increases tempo during the verses, sharing the fear of its character with the listener. “Pigs (Three Different Ones)” continues the album’s habit of conveying passionate emotions lyrically and musically. Gilmour’s solo features a voice box – a device which allows the voice to control his guitar’s output – for the first time in Pink Floyd’s discography. Gilmour’s solo symbolizes capitalist pigs that cannot empathize with humanity “seemingly because they attempt to do it unauthentically, which is conveyed through their use of technological ‘tricks’” (Rose 110). Every instrumental entry is sharp, echoing Waters’ resentment towards the “pig class” of Britain. “Sheep” opens with a synthesizer solo centered around a D Dorian scale, uncommon to most music and used effectively to promote a sense of unease within the listener. The first two verses, their harmonic rise to E minor, combined with the quickest tempo of any song on the album, all support the revolutionary vision of the song. *Animals*’ use of key changes, tempo, and chord voicing highlight Pink Floyd’s expert understanding of musical theory and ability to convey emotion.

Rarely does an album feature expert musicianship, a profound argument, or mass appeal. *Animals* delivers on all three attributes by consistently prioritizing quality over quantity and delivering a unique and involving listening experience. Though the albums’ long songs decrease the album’s radio playability, the album’s reviews and sales prove its commercial success: *Animals* was certified platinum within five weeks of its release by the Recording Industry Association of America and was ranked in the top three albums across Europe and North America. A solid political critique is rarely found in music, much less an argument Pink Floyd’s songwriting creativity and expertise gave birth to one of the most unique concept albums. Regardless of definition, *Animals* was, and still is, one of the most ingenious pieces of music ever written. 

## Works Cited
- Blake, Mark. Pigs Might Fly: The Inside Story of Pink Floyd. London: Aurum Press, 2011. ebook.
- Cohen, Gilad. "Expansive Form in Pink Floyd's "Dogs"." Music Theory Online 21.2 (2015). Online Document.
- Morgan, Kenneth O. "Britain in the Seventies - Our Unfinest Hour?" French Journal of British Studies (2017). Online Document.
- Pink Floyd. Animals. Columbia Records, 1977. Online.
- Rose, Philip Anthony. Which One's Pink? Towards an Analysis of The Concept Albums of Roger Waters and Pink Floyd. Master's Thesis. Hamilton, Ontario: McMaster University, 1995. Online Document.

