---
title: "Essay: A Young Guy From Brooklyn"
last_modified_at: 2023-09-06T00:00:00-05:00
categories:
  - Essay
tags:
  - Politics
  - Essay
---

# A Young Guy From Brooklyn: Commemerating Bernie Sandards

How does a young guy from Brooklyn end up becoming one of the most likeable, fiercest Politicians this country has ever seen? More interestingly, how does someone form a certain set of values that remain resistant to change throughout a nearly fifty-year political career? My name is Seth Thomas, and I’m here to commemorate senator Bernard Sanders of Vermont, someone I have personally never met, but have stood within two feet of during a rally in Finlay Park. Bernie, as he’s more well known, is a self-branded “democratic socialist,” an extremely controversial label in our country’s culture. However, Bernie deserves praise for his policy ideas; every one of his proposals, each and every plan fights and advocates for all races, all religious groups, all income brackets, and, most importantly, all Americans. To summarize, Bernie is extremely grounded in his values, an excellent collaborator, and completely unafraid to defend his beliefs.

To understand Bernie’s values, we first have to take a look his story. Born in 1941 to a Jewish-American father, Bernie’s formative years coincided with the rise of the Nazi Party and the Holocaust, in which many of his Polish relatives perished. Adolf Hitler’s election and his subsequent actions helped Bernie to realize the gravity and importance of politics. Fast forward to his college years, Bernie became extremely politically active while attending the University of Chicago. He joined the youth wing of the Socialist Party of America, the Congress of Racial Equality, and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, the organization that was born during the 1960 Greensboro sit-ins. After college, he somehow ended up in the middle of nowhere Vermont, and in 1981, decided to run for mayor of Burlington, the state’s largest city. Bernie ended up winning by just ten votes, and one of America’s most well-known socialists began his political career.

So at this point, I’ve established Bernie is a career politician, and knowing the current political climate in this country, many of you are going to say the man has no morals strictly basedon his career choice. But Bernie is different, and that’s largely due to his self-proclamation as a Democratic Socialist. Bernie’s approval ratings are consistently among the highest of any political figure in this country, and, if it wasn’t for the immense pushback on his “socialist” label, he would have been president of this country the past four years, and the next four to come.

Beginning with his tenure as mayor of Burlington, Bernie has always served the people. Regardless of appearance, race, economic class, or gender, Bernie advocated for every one of his constituents. He helped initiate a transformation of a small city in Vermont, from a sleepy town on the shores of Lake Champlain, to one of the most livable places in the country as of 2013. Bernie fought hard to ensure development throughout the city worked for all, not just the wealthy. He successfully led a redevelopment of the city’s waterfront, pioneered incredible affordable housing initiatives, and even dropped a spoken word mixtape. To this day, Burlington is fully on board with his revolution. The city owns and operates its fiber broadband network, providing residents with internet, phone, and television. It also owns its power company, which, since 2014, has been running on 100% renewable energy. After eight years, Bernie decided not to run for mayor again. However, Burlington embraced his revolutionary approach to politics - serving all constituents, what a concept! – and the city holds true to the values he instilled more than thirty years later.

There are many important things that follow on Bernie’s resume. First, after his last term as mayor, Bernie decided to decompress by teaching at the one and only Harvard University in their government school. Second, he represented Vermont from 1991 until 2007 in the U.S House of Representatives. He refused to be associated with any political party, and continually advocated for the people instead of a larger group goal. Bernie fiercely opposed the Iran War, fought against cuts to Social Security and Welfare, and disagreed with tax cuts for upper class citizens. Being an independent, Bernie could work with who he wanted, when he wanted. After his 16-year tenure in
the House of Representatives, Bernie successfully was elected to the Senate in 2007, a position he has held since. He continually advocates for things such as renewable energies and combatting the crisis of climate change, a single-payer healthcare system to eliminate inefficiencies within our medical infrastructure and, allowing every single worker to join a union to increase their negotiation power.

However, I think Bernie’s most impressive accomplishment comes from his 2016 and 2020 presidential campaigns. Bernie ran on the same “democratic socialist” beliefs that he embraced since his high school years. He wanted to rebuild our economy and government, so it worked for every citizen of the United States, not just those with money. His campaign sparked a revolution in this country. Bernie’s campaign engaged so many more people in the political process than ever imaginable, including myself. His messaging was simple: this country needs massive change. He showed that populist policies and enormous government spending plans to better the lives of Americans resonate with this country’s people, even if none of the plans will ever climb the mountain of bureaucracy. Bernie led two successful campaigns that transformed the political climate in this country, and even though they were ultimately unsuccessful, he returned the progressive movement into national spotlight.

Bernie’s storied political career shows he is a fighter on behalf of every American. He was “a socialist before it was cool,” and continually used his own experiences to shape his policies. He continually proposed policies that benefited all of us, and allowed his values to shape his beliefs rather than money. However, above all, Bernie was extremely empathetic to the problems this country faces. He didn’t shy away from it, and instead proposed massive changes to attempt to fix the problem. His message and influence captured my fifteen-year old self during the 2016 primaries, and his progressive ideals shape who I am as a person today. Regardless of political
affiliation, Bernie’s independence and dedication are extremely admirable. He refused to give up his values to gain something in return. The world would be a lot better of a place if everyone did the same.